>>Have you ever set too
few places at a table
or poured out too few
drinks because you
forgot to count yourself?
Funny, isn't it?
One's self is the
closest thing to you.
And yet just because
it's so close
and your eyes don't look at
you, you're difficult to see
and sometimes you
forget yourself.
There's a strange way in which
obviousness conceals things.
I've often been
struck by the fact
that some of the very greatest
discoveries that man has made
have been occasions when he's
suddenly noticed something that
was staring him in
the face all the time.
And when we see it,
we say, good heavens,
why didn't I ever
see that before?
There it was, right under the
my nose and I never noticed it.
Oh, this sort of thing
happens I suppose
every day when you
lose your glasses.
And you go around all over
the house looking for them.
And then, suddenly,
they're on your nose.
Or you've lost your handbag and
there it is over your shoulder.
There's an old story about an
Indian king who one day woke up
in the morning and
turned to his bedside
to look at himself
in the mirror.
He had a mirror like this,
these old bronze mirrors which
used to be polished
on one side and then
have a design of some
kind on the other.
And here he was with the
mirror beside his bed.
And he was kind of
bleary-eyed the morning.
And he picked it up and
looked into the wrong side.
And he said, where's my head?
I've lost it.
And he summoned
all his attendants
and started running around
all over his apartment looking
for his head.
And when the attendants
arrived, they said,
but your majesty, oh,
king, live forever,
it's still on your shoulders.
You looked in the wrong
side of the mirror.
And that story is told
as an illustration
of what is after
all the greatest
theme of Indian philosophy,
the recollection or remembering
of something that mankind as a
whole seems to have forgotten.
I was talking a moment ago about
great discoveries of benefit
to the human race,
how there are things
that might have been
obvious all the time.
Supposing there was a
very greatest discovery,
something that would really
set the heart of man at peace?
And it's the most
obvious thing there is
and nobody is
noticing it at all.
What might it be?
Well, when in
Indian philosophy it
is said that the objective
of the whole thing
is remembering or
recollecting something
that has been
forgotten, what is that?
It means remembering who
or what we really are?
Well, of course, if we
say, well, whom am I?
We say, well, I'm
I. I'm a person.
Well, what is a person?
Here is a person.
A person is originally
an actor's mask,
whether for a ordinary dramatic
performance or a ritual
performance.
And in the Greco-Roman
world, these masks
were called persona.
For the word
"persona" means that
through which there comes sound.
And those old
masks, as they were
made for the Greco-Roman
stage, had mouthpieces
that were shaped like a
megaphone, rather wide mouths.
And so because those mouths
emphasized the sound,
persona became the
name for a mask.
And this use of the
word still survives
when you look in the
title pages of a play
and you see a list
called dramatis
personae, the
persons of the drama.
Because this was originally
a list of the masks
that the actors
were going to wear.
And so it isn't it strange
that the word "person," which
originally meant
a mask, has come
to mean what we really and
truly feel ourselves to be?
And this is perhaps a very,
very significant confusion.
For after all, what
one is as a person,
that is to say as a mask,
as a part in a play,
is what we nowadays
call one's role.
And we are such, aren't
we, that we very much
depend for our personal security
and our social security,
we very we tend to fix
upon and identify ourselves
with certain roles.
Now, I think one of the
best illustrations of this
is when you go to
a party and you're
meeting a lot of strange people.
And when your hostess
introduces you to each other,
she always give some little
indication in her introduction
so that another person
can identify your role.
She says, oh, I do want
you to meet Mr. Smith.
Mr. Smith is a painter.
I do want you to meet Mr. Jones.
Mr. Jones is a banker.
And so Mr. Smith and Mr.
Jones know who they are.
But what they know is not
exactly who they really are.
They know what roles
they play in society.
And by knowing their
roles, they are
able to converse with each
other without difficulty.
You have, in other
words, a starting point
for conversation.
Oh, it may be
something so trivial.
Oh, I do want you
to meet Mrs. Doakes
because she comes
from your home state.
And then immediately
the conversation
can begin quite easily, talking
about one's home town or home
state.
And in this way, you
can talk with people
without ever really meeting
them by identifying clearly
with your role and
playing your part.
Oh, I mean it may be some
other part than banker,
or doctor, or lawyer.
It may be regular guy,
or buffoon, or bohemian,
or whatever sort of role
one identifies oneself with.
By playing this part,
you can completely
conceal yourself
from other people.
The only people who don't
really need these role keys
in meeting each
other are children.
A child has no embarrassment
in going straight up to you
and saying, oh,
what a pretty face
you have or isn't that
a funny nose you've got.
He can go right
into conversation
without having to meet your
persona, your front, your mask.
And that is, of course, why
great philosophers and sages
have always admired children
and have in that respect
tried to emulate them.
So then, society encourages
us, not only modern society,
but ancient society, have
encouraged the individual
to identify himself
with a consistent role
and to play his
part consistently.
In other words, we all find that
the moment in which we really
make fools of ourselves,
when something goes wrong,
is when we act out a role.
In other words, my
role at the moment
is being a speaker on
television and talking to you.
And I would be considered to
flub the show if suddenly I
acted out of role and did
something that simply speakers
don't do.
And if I did this
unintentionally,
I would feel embarrassed
because my role had slipped.
Now, in Indian society,
the roles that people play
are what we now know
as their castes.
In old Indian society, there
were for principal castes,
the priests, the warriors
and rulers, the merchants,
and the laborers.
Rather much, as in
medieval European society,
there were lords spiritual,
lords temporal, commons,
and serfs.
And then within each one
of these caste groups,
there were many
subdivisions corresponding
to the various vocations
that people adopted.
But Indian society contains
an interesting custom,
an interesting tradition.
And that is that when a
man has established himself
in his role, about the
middle of his life,
he hands over his vocation,
the running of his business
or his shop, or whatever it
may be, to his oldest son,
and says, now you carry on.
And the man who gives up
his job or gives up his role
becomes what is called
a forest dweller.
He retires from active life.
He changes his name and
he gives up his role.
And this is done in
the pursuit of what
is called in Hindu
philosophy, liberation
or to use the technical
term, "moksha."
And this means
becoming a nobody.
You give up your
identifying role.
You drop caste and become,
as it were, no one.
You, in other words, go
to find the great question
of all life, who behind
these masks, these parts
I play in life, who am I really?
Now, we often talk
about finding ourselves.
We often talk about finding
ourselves in relation
to our work.
Am I doing the job
I am fitted for?
Am I married to the person
who really suits me?
Am I living in the
part of the world that
is really congenial
to my nature?
But this, you see, raises
the question, doesn't it,
what is one's
fundamental nature?
And if you look into
this question carefully,
you suddenly find yourself
rather like an onion.
You start peeling
off masks, or skins,
looking deeper and
deeper and deeper,
until you get to the
point of ultimate puzzle.
What is it behind
all this that is
the very foundation
of my consciousness?
What am I really?
And in Hindu philosophy,
the answer to that question
is always behind all the
many masks of the world,
be they masks of men, or
masks of animals, or plants,
or stars, or mountains,
there is one actor.
There is the supreme
self of the universe,
which is called Brahman.
Brahman in it's personal
form, Brahma, but Brahman,
is the name thus
accorded to the one actor
playing all the different
personae or parts.
And the deepest
self in man, the one
who is under all
those onion skins,
really us, is called
Atman, meaning the self.
And the great formula of Indian
philosophy is Atman is Brahman.
You are not really
this role, this mask,
whether it be the social
mask or the mask of skin
over one's body.
What you are fundamentally
is the Brahman.
And so comes this
formula, which sums up
the whole inner
doctrine of Hinduism.
Excuse me.
I've started to write
it the wrong way.
We'll begin over here, tat.
That means that.
[SANSKRIT] that thou art, or,
in ordinary English order,
though art that.
The very word "that" English
is I think originally
from this Sanskrit
expression, tat.
And this is, in a
way, the best word
that can be used
for the underlying
reality of the world.
And perhaps I can try
and explain to you why.
Now when I was in
my teens, I first
became interested in this.
And I very much fervently
wanted to realize
what it would be like to
experience the whole world
as a unity and myself
as being involved
in that unity, of being it,
of being the one self which
is all?
And at first I thought,
well, I suppose
this is a state of
consciousness, which,
if one realized it,
all the distinctions
and outlines of things
would disappear.
And the whole
world would kind of
go blewah, into a great sea
of cosmic jello, like this.
Or else I thought perhaps that
it wouldn't be quite like that,
but maybe everything
would become suffused
with a kind of omnipresent
interior light, something
like this.
But I couldn't make
it happen that way.
And you know it was strange.
There was one thing
in my experience--
I was living in London in
those days-- which really stuck
in my craw, one thing that I
just couldn't make disappear
into this jello or this
infinite continuum of the one
ultimate reality, the true
self behind everything.
And that happened to
be a London taxi cab.
I wonder if you've ever
seen in London taxicab?
They used to look like this.
They were upright.
They were ugly.
They were the most individual,
impertinently definite things
you could imagine.
And I could not make these
silly gadgets, which I saw all
around me, disappear
into the one.
And suddenly it
dawned on me one day
that to see the
unity behind life,
things don't have
to merge into jello.
They don't have to become
suffused within a light.
I saw it with that taxi cab.
I saw that that
taxicab, by being
the very upright,
impertinent, stupid
looking thing that it
is, precisely as taxicab,
it manifested the one
underlying reality.
In other words, this
is not a question
of imposing upon the
world of differences
some abstract conception
of unity in your mind.
You don't have to go around
saying to yourself, now,
don't get fussed.
Don't be disturbed.
Be at peace.
All things are
fundamentally one.
You don't have to
do that at all.
You have to see the
secret that it's
the very differences of
things, the very individuality
of things, their prickly,
personal reality,
that manifests, that shouts out,
that advertises the underlying
unity.
You remember perhaps that
in a previous program,
I was talking to you about
the contrast of figure
and background.
And we saw what
happened to my figure
when the background disappeared.
And we were getting from that
the idea that it's precisely
the difference
between the figure
and the background that
makes us able to see
both the background
and the figure.
There is, in other
words, a hidden unity
underlying these contrasts.
And so, then, it is
through seeing the fact
that the differences
themselves are the unity,
that we come to
an inward, clearer
realization of, after all, the
thing that we've forgotten.
Because going about
our everyday tasks
involves constantly focusing
on the details of things,
focusing on the contrasts and
the differences between them.
And so in this absorption, in
dealing with the difference
aspect of the world
we simply forget,
we overlook the unity
aspect of the world which
the very differences
so clearly proclaim.
So then, if we know that the
differences reveal the unity,
then we see that what we
really are is tat, that, it.
So what?
Does it make any difference?
Does it make anybody any
happier to understand
that behind all the
differences of life
is a unity which
each one of us is?
Well, it does, doesn't
it, in this way.
If you really notice,
you come to a point
where nothing can phase you.
For you know that
you aren't anymore
just the fragmented individual.
You know that what you are
deep down at the very center
is something beyond
time and change,
the eternal Atman,
the self of the world.
Now, of course,
that just doesn't
mean that you become,
oh, insensitive.
It doesn't mean that you
go beyond human emotions.
That you're no longer ever
afraid, no longer sad.
No longer loving other people
because you see it's all one
and so it doesn't
make any difference.
It's not like that.
In Buddhism, they
say, our object is not
to make stone Buddhas,
but living Buddhas.
A stone Buddha is
a symbol of what
we might call an ultra-stoic,
a person who so represses
his fears and his emotions
that he doesn't have any left.
And they say, well, if
that's your idea of a sage,
a rock will do just as well.
It doesn't mean that.
It means, rather, that you're no
longer afraid of being afraid.
You're no longer afraid
of grief, of pain,
of being sensitive.
You're no longer
afraid, in other words,
to go into life with total zest.
In other words, when we say
you're not phased by anything,
it means you don't block.
Blocking is always
difficult to overcome.
Just about the time
of year when we
have to do a lot of figuring,
say to work out our income tax,
don't you sometimes when you're
adding columns of figures
that there are
certain combinations,
like maybe 9 and 7, or something
like that, at what you block?
And this annoys you.
Every time you reach
this combination,
you think, oh, 9 and 7 is,
um, 1, 2 3, 4, 5, 6, 9.
Yes.
Oh, 13.
And you block.
9 and 7 aren't 12
anyway, you see.
You see how it is.
Well, anyway, that happens.
If you get annoyed
that you block at it,
you block at blocking.
And it gets worse
and worse and worse.
But if you don't
get annoyed at it,
you say, oh, well, I'm
going to block anyway,
and you don't resist the
fact that you block, it's OK.
And you'll eventually
stop blocking.
So in this way too,
it isn't a question
of a state of mind which enables
us not to be afraid at all,
of not to be sad at all.
It's a state of mind in which
we don't block at being afraid.
We are not afraid of fear.
And so, as I said,
this enables one
to go into life with a
certain kind of zest.
Once upon a time, there was
a Chinese Buddhist master.
And one of his disciples
asked him a question.
What is the Tao?
You know I've used that word
before, T-A-O. Tao means
the way of nature in one sense.
It has almost the same
meaning as Brahman.
It is the same one reality
underlying the whole universe.
Also Tao means a way of
life, a way of behaving,
a way of conduct.
So both meanings were
involved in his question.
What is the ultimate reality?
What is the way of
conduct by which one
comes into accord with it?
And the teacher answered
him in two words, walk on.
Oh, no.
It's almost like a
policeman when he comes out
with a crowd hanging
about the streets.
And he says, come on out.
Keep moving.
For after all, keeping
moving in the sense
is keeping alive, keeping
things circulating, not holding,
not blocking.
Not, as it were, getting
clots of blood in one's
psychological and
spiritual arteries.
Another illustration
that is given
of this state in Chinese
Buddhist philosophy
is the way of behavior of a
ball on a mountain stream.
Think of a ping-pong
ball on rough water.
The ball keeps dancing,
dancing, dancing.
And it is never swamped.
It never stops moving.
It's always instantly responsive
to the motion of the water.
And so in this way,
when we are living,
to be able to go straight into
things without hesitation,
without blocking, we
have our own proverb.
He who hesitates is lost.
And hesitation is
what is basically
meant in Buddhist thought by
attachment in a bad sense,
in the sense of evil
attachments to the world.
It doesn't mean love.
It doesn't mean joy and
sorrow in that sense.
It means blocking at love,
blocking at joy and sorrow,
blocking at fear.
This is the
attachment from which
the sage is going
to be liberated.
And so in his answer, walk
on, keep going-- sometimes
you wake up, maybe
Monday morning,
and you think of
the week coming up
and all the chores
you've got to do.
And right as you
wake up in bed, you
feel this fundamental
block to going any further.
And you think, oh, I
wish time wouldn't go on.
I'd just like to lie
here and let it stop.
I don't want to face it.
And the longer you lie that
way, the more and more difficult
it becomes to wake up.
And the answer that's
given to us over and over
again is just get up.
Don't think about it.
Move.
Walk on.
For the moment one moves into
it, the problem becomes simple.
It's only when you stop to think
about it that it's difficult.
I referred to a previous program
to that astonishing gentleman
Bodhidharma, the
sage who is supposed
to been one of the people
who introduced Buddhism
from India into China.
Let's look at a picture
of Bodhidharma again.
This is here he is in
rather an odd form.
You can see him there looking
like a kind of a roly-poly.
And here he is rolling
around various positions.
And at the top it says,
jinsei nana korobi ya oki,
which means, seven times down,
eight times up, such is life.
And here he is, the
doll that can never
be phased because he's
not afraid of yielding.
[TINKLING] Whichever
way you knock him,
he always comes up again
because down becomes up.
You can never defeat him.
He doesn't block.
[TINKLING]